GH-33746: [R] Update NEWS.md for 11.0.0 (#33748)
apache/arrow: r/NEWS.md

# arrow 10.0.1.9000

## New features

### Docs
* A substantial reorganisation, rewrite of, and addition to many of the 
vignettes and README (@djnavarro, #14514)  

### Reading/writing data
* new functions `open_csv_dataset()`, `open_ts_dataset()`, and 

> `open_delim_dataset()` all wrap `open_dataset()`- they don't provide new 

Reviewer: replace hyphen with em dash
```suggestion
`open_delim_dataset()` all wrap `open_dataset()`—they don't provide new 
```

* `stringr::str_remove()` and `stringr::str_remove_all()` (#14644)

### Installation

* The package can now be installed offline using pre-downloaded binaries 
(@pgramme, #14086)
* The package can now automatically link to system installations of the AWS SDK
C++ (@kou, #14235)

### Other

* new dplyr (1.1.0) function `join_by()` has been implemented for dplyr joins 
on Arrow objects (equality conditions only)  (#33664)
* StructArray objects can now be created directly via `StructArray$create()` 
(#14922)
* curl timeout policy can now be configured for S3 (#15166)

## Minor improvements and fixes

* Arrays of Decimal type objects can now be created directly and without 
casting (#15211)
* calling `lubridate::as_datetime()` on Arrow objects now can handle time in 
sub-seconds (@eitsupi, #13890)
* `head()` can now be called after `as_record_batch_read()` without error 
(#14518)
* fix for a bug in which `dplyr::right_join()` did not coalesce keys (#15077)
* fix for a bug in output returned when multiple 
`dplyr::group_by()`/`dplyr::summarise()` calls are used (#14905)
* fix for a bug in which `dplyr::summarize()` fails with division when divisor 
is a variable (#14933)

> * fix for a bug in which as.Date fails going from timestamp[us] to timestamp[s] 
> (#14935)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* fix for a bug in which `as.Date` fails going from `timestamp[us]` to
`timestamp[s]` (#14935)
```

> * fix for a bug in which Creating an Array from an object bigger than 2^31 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* fix for a bug in which creating an Array from an object bigger than 2^31 
```

results in an Array of length 0 (#14929)
* fix for a bug in which accents in file paths caused an error in 
`read_csv_arrow()` (#14930)

> * fix for a bug which prevented Arrow arrays of POSIXlt objects being created 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* fix for a bug which prevented Arrow arrays of `POSIXlt` objects being created 
```

from Scalars (#15277)
* multiple changes to ensure compatibility with dplyr 1.1.0 (@lionel-, #14948)

## Breaking changes

> * rlang dependency must be at least version 1.0.0 because of check_dots_empty 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* rlang dependency must be at least version 1.0.0 because of `check_dots_empty()` 
```

  on Arrow objects (equality conditions only).  (#33664)
* StructArray objects can now be created directly via `StructArray$create()`. 
  (#14922)
* curl timeout policy can now be configured for S3. (#15166)

## Minor improvements and fixes

* `map_batches()` now is lazy by default. (#14521)
* Arrays of Decimal type objects can now be created directly and without 
  casting. (#15211)
* Calling `lubridate::as_datetime()` on Arrow objects now can handle time in 
  sub-seconds. (@eitsupi, #13890)
* `head()` can now be called after `as_record_batch_read()` without error. 
  (#14518)
* Fix for a bug in which `dplyr::right_join()` did not coalesce keys. (#15077)
* Fix for a bug in output returned when multiple 
  `dplyr::group_by()`/`dplyr::summarise()` calls are used. (#14905)
* Fix for a bug in which `dplyr::summarize()` fails with division when divisor 
  is a variable. (#14933)
* Fix for a bug in which `as.Date()` fails going from `timestamp[us]` to
  `timestamp[s]`. (#14935)
* Fix for a bug in which creating an Array from an object bigger than 2^31 
  results in an Array of length 0. (#14929)
* Fix for a bug in which accents in file paths caused an error in 

>   `read_csv_arrow()`. (#14930)

Reviewer 2: @paleolimbot did you mean to change the meaning of this? #14930 appears to be about paths not error messages

> * Fix for a bug which prevented Arrow arrays of `POSIXlt` objects being created 
>   from Scalars. (#15277)

Reviewer 2: Here's an example of what I mean about flipping "fix for a bug in which"

```suggestion
* Arrow Scalars can be created from `POSIXlt` objects. (#15277)
```

* Multiple changes to ensure compatibility with dplyr 1.1.0. (@lionel-, #14948)

## Breaking changes

> * rlang dependency must be at least version 1.0.0 because of 

Reviewer 3: In general, I don't think dependency upgrades are breaking changes.

The one thing that I did find looked like a breaking change is the change in `map_batches` to be `.lazy = TRUE` by default.

> * rlang dependency must be at least version 1.0.0 because of 

Author: Swapped them round, thanks folks

# arrow 10.0.1.9000

## New features

### Docs

* A substantial reorganisation, rewrite of and addition to, many of the 
  vignettes and README. (@djnavarro, 

>   [#14514](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14514))  

Reviewer 4: Simple question: Improved documentation is new features?

Author: It's substantial enough to warrant inclusion, yep.

* `head()` can be called after `as_record_batch_read()`. 
  ([#14518](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14518))
* `dplyr::right_join()` correctly coalesces keys. 
  ([#15077](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15077))
* Output is accurate when multiple `dplyr::group_by()`/`dplyr::summarise()` 
  calls are used. ([#14905](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14905))
* `dplyr::summarize()` works with division when divisor is a variable. 
  ([#14933](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14933))
* `as.Date()` can go from `timestamp[us]` to `timestamp[s]`. 
  ([#14935](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14935))
* Creating an Array from an object bigger than 2^31 has correct length 
  ([#14929](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14929))
* curl timeout policy can be configured for S3. 
  ([#15166](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15166))
* Multiple changes to ensure compatibility with dplyr 1.1.0. 
  (@lionel-, [#14948](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14948))
* rlang dependency must be at least version 1.0.0 because of 
  `check_dots_empty()`. (@daattali, 
  [#14744](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14744))

## Breaking changes

> * `map_batches()` is lazy by default. ([#14521](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14521))

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this be at the top of the list because I think users are more interested in Breaking Changes?

Author: Yeah, that would mirror the tidyverse guide, so will move it

### Reading/writing data

* New functions `open_csv_dataset()`, `open_tsv_dataset()`, and 
  `open_delim_dataset()` all wrap `open_dataset()`- they don't provide new 
  functionality, but allow for readr-style options to be supplied, making it 
  simpler to switch between individual file-reading and dataset 
  functionality. ([#33614](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/33614))
* User-defined null values can be set when writing CSVs both as datasets 
  and as individual files. (@wjones127, 
  [#14679](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14679))
* The new `col_names` parameter allows specification of column names when 
  opening a CSV dataset. (@wjones127, 
  [#14705](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14705))
* The `parse_options`, `read_options`, and `convert_options` parameters for 
  reading individual files (`read_*_arrow()` functions) and datasets 
  (`open_dataset()` and the new `open_*_dataset()` functions) can be passed 
  in as lists. ([#15270](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15270))
* File paths containing accents can be read by `read_csv_arrow()`. 
  ([#14930](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14930))

> ### dplyr compatibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### dplyr compatibility

```

  on Arrow objects (equality conditions only).  
  ([#33664](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/33664))

### Function bindings

* The following functions can be used in queries on Arrow objects:
  * `lubridate::with_tz()` and `lubridate::force_tz()` (@eitsupi, 
  [#14093](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14093))
  * `stringr::str_remove()` and `stringr::str_remove_all()` 
  ([#14644](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14644))

### Arrow object creation

* Arrow Scalars can be created from `POSIXlt` objects. 
  ([#15277](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15277))
* `Array$create()` can create Decimal arrays. 
  ([#15211](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15211))
* `StructArray$create()` can be used to create StructArray objects. 
  ([#14922](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14922))

### Installation

* Improved offline installation using pre-downloaded binaries. 
  (@pgramme, [#14086](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14086))
* The package can automatically link to system installations of the AWS SDK
  for C++. (@kou, [#14235](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14235))

> ## Minor improvements and fixes

Reviewer 2: For consistency 

```suggestion
### Minor improvements and fixes
```

Author: Yeah, I was going off https://style.tidyverse.org/news.html#organisation-3

* Calling `lubridate::as_datetime()` on Arrow objects can handle time in 
  sub-seconds. (@eitsupi, 
  [#13890](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/13890))
* `head()` can be called after `as_record_batch_read()`. 
  ([#14518](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14518))
* `dplyr::right_join()` correctly coalesces keys. 
  ([#15077](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/15077))
* Output is accurate when multiple `dplyr::group_by()`/`dplyr::summarise()` 
  calls are used. ([#14905](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14905))

> * `dplyr::summarize()` works with division when divisor is a variable. 

Reviewer 2: Seems like all of these "minor improvements" up to here could go under the "dplyr compatibility", plus the one about dplyr 1.1.0 below.

Author: I figured these are more fixes to existing functionality than new functionality per-se, though happy to move if you think that'd make more sense?

  ([#14933](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14933))
* `as.Date()` can go from `timestamp[us]` to `timestamp[s]`. 
  ([#14935](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/14935))

> * Creating an Array from an object bigger than 2^31 has correct length 

Reviewer 2: This could go under "Arrow object creation"

Author: I intentionally left it there as I figured the others were originally reported as bugs, but their resolution could be seen as feature additions, whereas this is something that was just a straight-up bug.
